Author validation proposal (#257)
ONSdigital/eq-author-app: docs/architecture/0003-author-validation.md

# 3. Author validation

Date: 2019-03-12

## Status

Accepted

## Context

Currently users are provided with very little useful feedback as to any errors in the questionnaire
they are building. This change aims to provide a way for the users to see feedback on the changes

> they are making but exposing the validation errors to them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they are making by exposing the validation errors to them.
```

There are multiple types of validations:

> - Intra-entity. These are validations within a field itself e.g. a question page must

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Intra-entity. These are validations on fields within an entity itself e.g. a question page must
```

released.

### 2. Validate a questionnaire on every request
During the investigation it was found that only completely improbable extreme cases could cause
validation to run slowly (>10ms). So to make retrieving data in resolvers easier we implemented the
validation as express middleware so it would for every graphql request. This we appreciate is not
necessarily optimal but is very simple so will work for this initial version. If validation starts
becoming slower then we can investigate other options including: persisting/caching validations
after every write or, running validate in the resolvers when we are guaranteed to need them.

### 3. Re-validate the questionnaire after every mutation
The validation errors can change afer a mutation so we need to update the errors held in the context
once this has happened so that the result being read on the response of the mutation contain the
correct validation errors.

### 4. Provide the validation errors at the entiy level
All entities will have a validation errors array field in their graphql type which will contain a 
list of all the errors. Each error will contain:
- location - The field/property name that has the error

> - errorCode - The code representing the type of error

Reviewer: Two questions:

1. Is location alone enough context to target a single field? Just thinking of a case where, say, an answer and an option are both missing labels. Will location need to be parsed to determine the correct field on the UI to display the validation rule? Or do we need more fields in the result to give context?

2. Should we also return the underlying JSON Schema/AJV error for additional information about the validation?

Author: 1. I had expected the option itself to have its own validation errors. So the location should just be the field name in all cases I would have thought.

2. My worry is that it would couple the UI to API implementation so if we chose for some reason to use a new method for validation the interface to the UI could still be maintained.

Reviewer: Okay, good points 👍
